Astro 5 + collection loaders + legacy collections support (#2612)
withastro/starlight: .changeset/green-suns-drive.md

---
"@astrojs/starlight": minor
---

Adds support for Astro v5, drops support for Astro v4.

> ⚠️ **BREAKING CHANGE:** Astro v4 is no longer supported. Make sure you [update Astro](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v5/) and any other official integrations at the same time as updating Starlight:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Upgrade Astro and dependencies

⚠️ **BREAKING CHANGE:** Astro v4 is no longer supported. Make sure you [update Astro](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v5/) and any other official integrations at the same time as updating Starlight:
```
Not sure whether the headers are strictly speaking necessary, but it feels like this could be broken into 2 sections to make each part of the process obvious.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I think headings might be tricky because once this ends up inside the CHANGELOG there’s an expected heading hierarchy (and this entire changeset will be inside a bullet list). We’d need to double check what level these have to be if we think a heading is important.

```sh
npx @astrojs/upgrade
```

_Community Starlight plugins and Astro integrations may also need to be manually updated to work with Astro v5. If you encounter any issues, please reach out to the plugin or integration author to see if it is a known issue or if an updated version is being worked on._

> Astro 5.0 introduces a new version of [content collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) which Starlight is built on top of. We recommend converting the `docs` (and optionally the `i18n`) collection(s) used by Starlight to the new Content Layer API which brings several performance improvements and added capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Update your collections

⚠️ **BREAKING CHANGE:** Starlight's internal [content collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/), which organize, validate, and render your content, have been updated to use Astro's new Content Layer API and require configuration changes in your project.
```
Same thing here, just thinking of explicitly calling this out as another step, and focusing on what happened and to do about it.

Noting this removes the notion of "benefits" which could still be included!

1. **Move the content config file.** This file no longer lives within the `src/content/config.ts` folder and should now exist at `src/content.config.ts`.

>    The previous location is still supported, and is required if the [`legacy.collections`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/legacy-flags/) flag is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Am super tempted to not mention this, as we didn't in the upgrade guide during general upgrade advice, only for people NOT performing any upgrade steps. Avoids the risk of them not upgrading later, and they ARE making other upgrades here now. This should happen at the same time.

    };
   ```

   If you are using the [`i18n` collection](https://starlight.astro.build/guides/i18n/#translate-starlights-ui) to provide translations for additional languages you support or override our default labels, you will need to update the collection definition in a similar way and remove the collection `type` which is no longer available:

   ```diff
    // src/content.config.ts
    import { defineCollection } from "astro:content";
   +import { docsLoader, i18nLoader } from "@astrojs/starlight/loaders";
    import { docsSchema, i18nSchema } from "@astrojs/starlight/schema";

    export const collections = {
   -  docs: defineCollection({ schema: docsSchema() }),
   +  docs: defineCollection({ loader: docsLoader(), schema: docsSchema() }),
   -  i18n: defineCollection({ type: 'data', schema: i18nSchema() }),
   +  i18n: defineCollection({ loader: i18nLoader(), schema: i18nSchema() }),
    };
   ```

1. **Update other collections.** To update any other collections you may have, follow the [“Updating existing collections”](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v5/#updating-existing-collections) section in the Astro 5 upgrade guide.

> If you are unable to make any changes to your collections at this time, you can enable the [`legacy.collections` flag](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/legacy-flags/) which is supported by Starlight and will allow you to keep your collections in their current state until the legacy flag is no longer supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are unable to make any changes to your collections at this time, including Starlight's default `docs` and `i18n` collections, you can enable the [`legacy.collections` flag](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/legacy-flags/) to upgrade to v5 without updating your collections. This legacy flag exists to provide temporary backwards compatibility, and will allow you to keep your collections in their current state until the legacy flag is no longer supported.
```
Wanted to make sure the "your collections" was understood to also include the ones they might not think of as *their* collections!
